Hello and welcome to this lecture we're we're going to be creating a time table.
So the idea is you have a child or you yourself you're trying to learn the times tables you can have
this awesome app where you say you know I want to know the times table for five and it lists out all
the time tables.
You move down to like you know to for example and it's showing two 4 6 8.
And if you're not familiar with times tables it's you know what is two times one two times two two times
three two times four.
And if you do in the times table for five it's what's five times one five times to five times three
five times four or five times five.
And so we use the seek bar slider and we can kind of you know move around in whatever number it is.
I think we should have a minimum of one and go up to a max of 20.
You can decide what your parameters are going to be but if you think about it you know everything that
you need in order to make this happen you know about CGC bars you know about list views you can put
this all together.
So your challenge is for this lecture to go and make this app on your own.
So I'm going to ask you to pause in a second here and go ahead and do this and please give this a real
effort.
I know it's very tempting to just go ahead and you know hit play.
I'll I'll just walk through this with how Nick does it no you know how to do both these things.
I want you to give this a real try because as I've said before this is where the real learning takes
place.
So go ahead hit pause make this app and then come back.
I'll show you how I did it.
Maybe you'll find some differences between the way that we did things or maybe you'll just get absolutely
lost and after you spend a good chunk of time trying to figure it out you can say OK I'm just going
to go ahead and watch how Nick did it.
Please give this the old college try and go ahead.
Hit pause now.
All right so let's go ahead and get started here by creating a new project and I'm going to go ahead
and call mine.
Times tables think that adequately describes what it is we're trying to create here.
Let's go ahead and do that classic empty activity and we'll finish Android studio is off to do all its
magic creating this new project for so really what we're doing here is we're combining the stuff that
we learned with the Sikh bar and the recent stuff with the list view we're bringing it all together
for this nice mishmash So I hope you enjoyed the challenge here.
And of course I want to walk you through how I did it maybe see any differences you saw between the
two of us in case you just really really got stuck on something.
But with that let's go ahead and dive into the sort of first thing that we got to work on is the visual
side of things right we want to get our seek bar up top and then we also want to have a list view below
that.
So let's go ahead and get rid of that text view that we always get by default and we are going to bring
down a Sikh bar and luckily it's just nice here up at the top for some is going to click drag this out
and we've got to work on our constraints here so we're going to go ahead and up to the top and say hey
maybe you should be Lou.
I don't know five from the top.
That might be a good number just sort of all around because I got to hit enter on there.
There we go.
So maybe you know five from the top five from the left.
This is all looking good.
OK.
So we've got that information now it doesn't by default stretch all the way to the side.
Let me go and give us some space here so this will zoom in a little bit more so we can go ahead and
change these options and this is what we want so that we can get it to go all the way to the edges.
Right so we can see that.
And so the seeker looks pretty good the next thing that we want to work now is the table so we're going
to go to our containers.
There's our list fields just go ahead and drag that out.
And for this one almost by default you can always hit those plus buttons.
Right now it's got about an 8 border on all of it if you want to change that.
You totally can.
But that's up to you.
So with that let's go ahead with the Sikh bar and give them an ID.
So rather than just seek bar I'm going to call it times tables capital seek bar.
There we go it's usually good with IDs to have this camel case style of typing right where each time
we have a new word we capitalize the first letter.
I just want to make sure I'm aware of what we're doing when I do that so let's go ahead and update that.
OK.
On this list view we want to call this our times tables list view.
Excellent.
OK.
So we got ideas for both of these.
Now we can move back to our code here and actually start working on everything.
So first let's get access to that Sikh bar.
So we're going to say Sikh bar space and let's go ahead and give this a name I think we should just
stick with what we have the time.
Times tables seek par excellence.
So we're going to say this thing should be equal to animal use or a classic fine view by id capital
are id times table.
And look at that times tables seek bar.
All right so now that we've got the Sikh bar Oh and we've got to make sure that this is properly imported.
Come on I need you to give me the little pop up so I can import you.
Well we'll see as we keep going if this gets all that good that commenters should get rid of that are
saying should.
No no.
There we go there is our little light bulb.
OK.
So I'm not sure let's try this one more time.
Capital C bar.
We want the one here from Android widget.
We hit enter.
OK.
I guess maybe I just had typed out seek bar without hitting enter.
When you do that auto complete.
And you see that Android studio will automatically import the stuff that you need up top there.
So sometimes it can be a little bit tricky but you've got to make sure you get that.
Next we're going to go on to the list view and I'm going to go ahead and just call this.
You guessed it times tables list view.
And again we'll use our find view by Idea Capitol our I.D. times table list view.
All right now we have access to both the things from our SML here in our Java code.
That's great.
So the next step for us is we just want to start setting up the CGC bar right.
There's a few different options that we want to have with the Sikh bar.
So first we have to give the Sikh bar a max.
So first thing I'm going to type out the times table seek bar and I'm going to say you know what I want
to set the max that this thing could possibly be and I want that to be 20.
Other thing that we should probably set here is a starting point.
So we're going to take our seat bar and we're going to say set progress progress is sort of where the
Sikh bar currently is.
So I say let's just go ahead and start this thing out at 10.
That kind of seems like a reasonable position to be in.
So once we have that in place we need to write some code so that whenever the user is changing that
seat bar right moving things left to right that we can you know say OK now the times tables are going
to be for the ones the twos or threes the fours whatever it is.
So we need some listeners here.
So we're going to take our times table seek bar and then we're going to do a set on Sikh bar change
listener day.
So check this out when we say noon.
And we want a new Capitol Sikh barred up on Sikh bar changelessness.
This is going to be awesome when we hit enter here.
Boom we get all this crazy information.
So the on progress change this is whenever the user changes to a new location it's going to tell us
what position that's currently at.
And then also you can get information about when it's starting when it's stopping we're not going to
use these two.
We really only care about when it's actually changed.
But Gneisenau those two options are there for us.
OK.
So the first thing that we want to do is set some sort of minimum like this because we don't want to
have a time table for zero right ZERO times one times two times so whatever it is is going to be easier.
So we kind of want one to be our minimum.
So what we're going to do is we're going to create an event that we're going to call in and we're going
to sell it to what our minimum should be in this case one.
Now the reason we've created a variable here called men rather than just you know doing saying hey if
it's less than one is I want the option to be able to change what the minimum amount is.
You know maybe at some point in the future we want the minimum to be 5 10 to whatever it is it's just
always good in code to give names to variables.
I've heard it referred to as magic numbers you shouldn't have any magic numbers in your code where you're
you know doing computations and you know you just say oh OK as long as this thing is less than one and
say well why is it less than one it's better to say is this thing less than the minimum.
And then you can update the minimum.
So anyway a small little tip there.
So the thing that we want to do is we want to do a little if statement with this minimum and say OK
we want to check and see if what the progress is this little is that they pass over here if this thing
which is called II is less than the minimum that we have set up.
We'll go ahead and do our curly brackets here.
So if it's less than the minimum what we want to do is we want to update and say OK the times table
position that we're going to be working with is going to be equal to whatever the minimum is.
So this is you know for example if they have scrolled down to zero then we want to say okay and I guess
before this we need to make a new int called times table number OK.
We're not going to set this equal to anything for right now we'll just have it set up.
But what we're going to do here is we're going to say our times table number is going to be equal to
minimum.
So this basically saves us from OK if you know they have slide the slider all the way down to zero.
Or if you know we update this minimum to be higher if it's below the minimum we want it to at least
be the minimum that we're going to put an else statement on here and say okay well as long as it's not
lower than the minimum.
It's very simple.
We just want the times table number to be equal do whatever I is equal to because I is whatever wherever
that seek bar currently is maybe it's one two three four five all the way up to our Max which in this
case is 20 k so now that you've got that in place and the next thing that we want to do here is just
see if this is even working.
And so we're going to log out some information to see if we can get this to work so we're going to say
log in and we'll go ahead print out a few things so we're going to first say this is where the Sikh
bar value is at.
And then we are going to go ahead and get whatever this time table number is in print that out.
So we're going to say integer to her.
There we go.
Got to string.
We want to convert this puppy and then we're going to pass in the times table number.
So this way we can take what's ever inside of our times table number.
Print that out and let's go ahead and run this on our emulator.
OK go ahead and run that way for this guy to pop up it's always good to have the emulator sort of up
and running in the background that feel a little bit foolish now because I was going to say it loads
so quickly when you have the emulator up and running already but you are waiting for this it looks like
maybe it's doing a great or great old bill that's taking a little bit of time I guess as we're waiting
for this something that I would want to point out.
And just as I'm about to move into something it starts rolling up.
OK.
So here we go let's get log cat up so that we can see if our log shows so let's get our emulator here
and I'm going to move the bar and look at that down the bottom.
It's showing you know 987 all that good stuff.
This is good.
And let's go ahead and try to you know bring this thing down to zero and look at that and never display
zero.
Now something that we do have an issue with is that if we go all the way to the left it's actually at
the zero position but it's still you know the times table number is still equal to 1 but we don't really
want that there.
So something that we can do is here in this if statement if we found that they've gone past the minimum
we can go ahead and say all right you know what we want to update the CGC bar to you know move the bar
to the actual minimum when we can do that by simply typing out times tables seek bar dot and what we're
going to do is set progress just like we did up here where we set the progress to 10 initially.
In this case we're going to set it to the minimum to say hey you know if someone's moving this thing
along you know pass there we want to make sure it gets back to the one position.
So let's go ahead and see what this looks like on the actual device.
And now if we go ahead and move that all the way.
Look at that it won't even let us get down to that position.
So this is exactly what we're looking for and we can check log kept look at that we're getting all the
right values to show up there.
OK.
So that's looking really good.
We can move the CGC bar we get the information that we need.
The next thing that we need to do is we need to be able to now move forward and write some code.
Whenever somebody is going to you know we need to actually fill out that list right.
That's sort of our next step on things.
So what we're going to do is after we've done this we need to go ahead and type out here.
We need to make our array list first so we're going to say array list where we go and we want this to
be an array list of strings that makes it really easy to work with the list view.
And we're going to call this times table content.
Excellent.
And we're going to go ahead and say this is equal to a new array list of type string.
OK so we've got them place this is what we want to create isn't a list of strings that hold the proper
times table and then we need to fill that out for him with information that's a little bit tough here
because you know we want to it's always going to be different if it's the times tables or one it's just
one two three four five six seven eight nine you know up to I don't know you we can choose how far it
is that we want to go but the next time we're going to be 2 4 6 8 and then 3 9 3 6 9 12.
I should stop trying to do this and let the computer do the math for me.
But the best way to handle this is a for loop so a for loop can just automatically go through and check
and say OK well if you know the times table number is this then we're going to go ahead and do this
type of thing.
So what we're going to do is we're going to say four and let's set up our for loop here.
So the first thing is we're going to make a little int.
Now it's a little bit tough here because we're already using the int i hear.
So let's go ahead and use a different variable I'm going to call it in J.
So we're going to let I ere in J be equal to 1.
All right then we're going to go ahead and say if J is less than or equal to.
And this is we can decide how big we want our times table to go maybe we'll just say 10 for now and
then we're going to say you know each time we go through this we want to increase J by 1 to our curly
bracket with that for loop.
And then what we're going to do is we want to add now to this times table content array.
So let's go ahead and get that times table content.
And once we have that there we're going to say Dot add on this.
We have to add a string here.
So really what we want to add in the end we're hoping to take whatever the current number is here.
So what.
So we're going to take J.
And we want to multiply J times whatever the times table number is.
Let's go ahead and type that out.
So for example if J is 1 and they want to know the times table for five.
So is equal to 1 1 times 5 is 5.
The next time this for loop goes through J will be equal to 2.
So two times five is ten.
You kind of see how that loops through.
But we have a problem here because this is not a string.
This is an integer.
So again we need to do that cool little conversion step where we say all right we're going to take integer
to string and let's go ahead and put this inside of the parentheses just like that and we'll put our
cool little semi-colon.
And now this for loop will go ahead and add the proper times tables there.
So I mean we're getting to the homestretch here.
We have the array list.
We have the for loop that fills it up.
The next thing that we need to do is make our array adapter so let's go ahead.
We're going to make an array adapter.
We want this to be of type string.
OK.
And I'm just going to call this classic old array adapter.
This will be equal to a new array adapter.
And this is where we're going to start filling out all of these parameters so we want this for the context
and then we're going to pass lower case Android dot Capitol are lay out a simple list item one.
And then we want to pass in our arrays.
We're going to go ahead and pass and times table content and we'll do our semi-colon.
OK.
Now that we have the array adapter in place we are going to take our times table list view and say All
right we are going to set your adapter and let's pass in our array adapter that we just created.
Can we have written a lot of code.
We should probably test and make sure this thing works.
It's one of my big tips for programming never go too long without actually updating your code and making
sure that everything's working here.
And oh we are having a bit of an issue here.
Let's see what is not happy about.
So Android done our way out
them it's all right.
Let me go ahead and pause and see what it's not so happy about.
So I found out what the issue was and it's that when we refer to this I forgot that this is going to
be referring to this see bar because we're currently in this you know change listener inside of there
so this is referring to the Sikh bar when we actually wanted to refer to our activity here.
So I think the proper way to fix this and we're going to have to do this anyways because you know we
need to.
Well I was going to show you how you know when we first run the app and whenever we change the seeker
we want this code to run.
And so it's a good idea to put this code inside of its own function.
So what we're going to do is up here at the top we're going to go ahead and create our very own function.
So we're going to a public void or method you could also refer to it as a method.
I kind of go back and forth on that because I know technically it's a method but for me it's kind of
like well you know anytime you're in an activity you just sort of feels like you're making your own
function.
But anyway that's beyond the point of what we're trying to do here.
So we're going to generate the times table and there we're going to pass.
And then in the end we're going to pass in this times table number.
We'll go ahead and put that there.
And let's now do our curly bracket.
So with these curly brackets this is where we want to then go grab all of this awesome code.
We're going to cut this and then we'll go ahead and paste this right inside.
Excellent.
OK.
So now that we've got this information inside of here we need to be able to call this generate times
table.
So we're going to go ahead and move this down and I'm seeing a lot of red here I'm going to go ahead
and hit run because I am assuming something's wrong maybe Android studio is just prematurely freaking
out.
Yeah it's not liking how I handle this.
Oh and that's because I tried to put this function inside of the create method.
OK we're getting all sorts of different sorts of dumb stuff here.
OK so we need to put it up at the top here.
There we go that's looking a lot better.
All right so now that we have that again we need to call this generate times table song and move down
to where we had this before.
And we're going to call generate times table and we're going to pass in the times table number that
looks good but you know this we're going to an issue here and that's because you know we're trying to
refer to this time table list view which is created here inside of the on create method.
So that's that's not what we're looking for.
So what we need to do here is we're actually going to create this list view.
Let's go ahead and cut this.
We want this to be a property of the class.
Just go ahead and put that there.
And then instead we're going to take the name of this.
Go ahead and copy that and paste it in.
There we go.
And then that should handle our issues there.
So let's go ahead and now run this that we got everything sort of in place there.
So again when we move the CGC bar we should see that it updates the list view with the proper information.
This is kind of a moment of truth here we've done a lot of work to get up to this moment so you'll know
there's nothing and that's an issue I'm going to talk about that in a second but let's go ahead and
move this and look at that as soon as we move this thing.
We can go all the way up to 20 showing the times tables for 20.
We can go all the way down to 1.
This is beautiful so we've got the core function functionality showing up here.
Again I think the biggest thing is just when we opened the app for the first time we don't have anything
showing up and it's a very simple fix that you know we just go ahead and we call this generate times
table function on or on create for the very first time.
So we're just going to go ahead and call generate times table.
Now it's very tempting here to just go ahead and pass in the number 10 and this would probably be fine
but remember my whole lecture about magic numbers.
I think we can kind of clean up what we have here.
In fact with the max here that probably be a good place to change as well.
So I'm going to create an inch here called Max that I'm going to set equal to 20 an update with Max.
And I'm also going to create another event that I'm just going to call starting position.
And we're going to set this thing equal to 10.
And the reason I'm doing this is because you see where we repeated ten two times if we now use starting
position instead of just 10 arbitrarily I can say you know what I want starting position to be 1.
Now I want it to be five maybe I want it to be 13.
Whatever it is it just makes it that much easier for your coat.
So this is all I want to be consistent with my advice that I'm giving you.
But let's go ahead and see now.
When the app runs for the very first time if it's displaying the times table for the 10 position hand
and here comes the app.
Look at that.
It's showing the 10s.
Beautiful beautiful stuff.
Now just for fun because I think this is so cool that we can make this happen so quickly.
I want to do the times tables out to 100 just to see what that would look like.
So I'm going to go ahead and put that there.
Let's see what this looks like on the emulator.
I mean because this is what's cool about programming right this for loop.
All we had to do is change one number and all sudden loops going 100 times instead of 10.
So you know we go to some position here like that.
I can see seven all the way out to 700.
I mean it's just really amazing how this all works.
Anyways I hope you enjoyed creating this.
You know we kind of brought together some ideas and that's what we're hoping to do in this course right
you learn about the Sikh bar you learn about list views how can I then put those things together to
make something awesome right we want to take all these pieces that we're learning and build them together
so in the end that you are just an awesome baller developer.
OK.
So we still got plenty more to learn so let's go ahead and keep moving forward.